I am at the castle of Urquhart, near Loch Ness, in the mountains of Scotland. This whole area makes
part of the Great Glen fault - running from the northeast to the southwest, from the North Sea
through Inverness, through Scotland in an almost straight line, then forms Loch Ness, and then goes
all the way through the Irish Sea and Ireland. It is a transform fracture, two parts of the
earth sliding alongside each other.
This is the middle of the Highlands, the mountains that can be found throughout Scotland and all the way
to Norway: the same mountains that were formed when continents nearly 400 million years
suffered. This was before Pangea, the enormous supercontinent, all the land on earth at one
place - that would only be formed a hundred million years later, and this would be the Central
Pangea Mountains. The time scale we are talking about is incomprehensible to people.
But Pangea eventually split up. Land continued to move, at about the same speed as with which you fingernails
to grow. And during this unimaginably long time this mountain was split. Not only by
the North Sea, between here and Scandinavia, but also through the Atlantic Ocean, which was slowly forming.
Just look at Newfoundland, in the northeast of Canada: you will see the same properties,
the same line from the northeast to the southwest as with the Great Glen fracture. Canada and Scotland
are separated by an ocean and still move slowly apart, but once they were connected.
The fossils and geology fit. These mountains, these beautiful mist-covered Scottish mountains
are also the Appalachians, the mountain range that runs through the south of the US.
There has been a lot of erosion and uplift since then,
that happened over a period of about half a billion years, but once they were one and the same.
The Scottisch Highlands and the Appalachians are the same mountain range,
literally an ocean away from each other.